00:00 
Hi class, we're here for the next section. We're starting chapter 4. Chapter 4 is all about exponential functions. So in this chapter, we're going to analyze the graphs of exponential functions, how to apply them in different situations. We're going to look at some more limits and things of that nature. So we're going to start off chapter 4 with 4 .1, which is exponential functions. So the definition of an exponential function that has a base of a where a is a real positive value, right? It's a positive value and it cannot be one. Okay. So it's going to be or zero in this case, right? 

00:45 
So, 0 is not considered positive or negative so that kind of This condition right here being a positive real number excludes 0 already So the only value that we're not looking at then is a being 1 and we'll talk about why that is. Okay? Here X is also going to be a real number. It can be any value There's no restrictions on it. It doesn't have to be positive doesn't have to be negative. It can be 0 it can be 1 It can be all kinds of things, right? The form is f of x, right? Our function is a raised to the power of x. So for exponential functions, we have our base of a and we are our inputs are in the exponent position, right? We're going to be looking at a lot of the rules. We're going to be using the rules of exponents. So if you are fuzzy on your exponential rules, right? 

01:41 
right multiplying to two exponential terms that have the same base but a different power, or dividing two terms that have the same base but a different power, right, things like that, I suggest you go ahead and review chapter one. So it was somewhere in chapter one, 1 .2, I believe, that we were talking about these sorts of functions and the rules of exponents. So if you're a little fuzzy on those rules, I suggest you pause the video and go refresh on those. So why do we restrict a in these ways? So let's kind of take a look at those. So here the possibilities for a are that they are that it is between 0 and 1 or that it's larger than 1. If it's between 0 and 1 then that means basically it's a fractional value, it's a decimal value, something to that nature right? And our function is going to be decreasing. 

02:41 
exponentially. If it is larger than one, okay, so from one to any large number, it's going to be exponentially increasing. The reason that we can't allow a to be 1 is because if we have a base of 1 to any power, we're just going to get 1 out again. 1 to the 12th power is 1. So if our base is 1, our function is going to equal 1 for any input that we plug in. Any value of x that is a real number. If our base is a negative number, then what happens is it is going to alternate back and forth, back and forth from a positive value to a negative value as we plug in different values of X, right? 

03:28 
If this is negative two, for instance, when this is an even number, I'll get negative 2 times negative 2 for instance will be positive if it's an odd number negative 2 to the third power for instance I'll get out a negative value so it'll bounce back and forth between being positive and being negative And it will not be a continuous function. So let's just take a quick trip over to Desmos real fast and kind of look at what that would look like as a function. Okay, so now that we're in Desmos, let's say that our function is... So I'll go 2 to the x power here. And as you can see, it is increasing. If it was, let's say, 1 half x, I'm exponentially decreasing. As I move forward, my function is getting smaller. 

04:24 
So let's say then that we had just 1 to the x. So as you can see, you get just a constant function, right? It's just a constant function 1 everywhere. Output is always 1. So let's say we have a decreasing function and we change it to negative. So the way that this works is now you can see it's a bunch of dots. So as I plug in different values of x, I alternate from being positive to being negative, right? Positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative. And so the more I zoom in, oh, right? You see Desmos is having a lot of problems trying to graph this function for us. 

05:25 
What happened? Oh, that's why it's just signing in. right so I go negative yeah it has a problem trying to do this for us all right and so if I put negative here all that's doing is saying that this whole function is negative and that's why it just flips over the axes right however when we have it inside here right and negative value to the power you can see now that Desmos I broke in Desmos right it's not working anywhere okay so we restrict this to being either to only being positive and not being one That's how that works. Okay. So when our function is in this form, right, just a to the x, our y -intercept is always going to be 1, right? Because remember what the y -intercept is? 

06:24 
It's what happens when x is equal to 0. So if I plug in 0 here, it's always going to be 1, right? Anything to the 0 power is always 1. So my y -intercept for this type of function is always 1. Now, if I had some number in front, like if this was f of x equals 1, 3 times 2 to the X for instance then my y -intercept changes obviously because now I'm scaling the value vertically right I'm amplifying the value and so then obviously that would change it in the way that we were transforming functions way back in chapter 2 so I know we looked at decimals already but for our presentation here, I have another graph, right? So when a is larger than 1, our function is exponentially increasing. And when it is in between 0 and 1, not including 0, not including 1, right? Open brackets, it is exponentially decreasing. 

07:25 
So again, note that my function is never actually zero. It can get very, very close to zero depending on, you know, if it's decreasing, it gets very, very close. If it's increasing, it starts very, very small. But there's no way for me to plug anything into x to make this value zero, right? I can't plug in a value zero. here, let me take all this out, I can never plug something into this exponential position to make the output zero. It does not happen. So I can get close to zero, but I can never actually equal zero. So note also that if a is larger than one, so that's this increasing function, If I plug in a negative exponent to that, okay, so let's look here, right? So when I plug in negative values, notice that I have small values, right? 

08:26 
Also, not only that, but let's say that I write my function as a to the negative x. So we know what that as a transformation does to a function, right? That flips us across the y -axis. So mathematically speaking, a to the negative x is the same as a to the negative 1 to the x power, right? a to the negative 1 is the same as 1 over a to the x power. 

08:54 
This now in between 0 1 right because if a is large let's say a was 3 it turns into 1 /3 X if my function is a to the negative X power okay so that will give us a base that's between 0 1 and it'll take us from an increasing function to a decreasing function or as we see here basically it will rotate it across the X the y -axis reflection cross -axis So let's do an example. Find the equation for the graph of exponential function in the form of f of x equals a to the x that is provided Okay, so we have a graph here. 

09:39 
We got our x -axis our y -axis you can see that this is exponential And then we're given a point okay it crosses through 0 1 so we know that it's going to look like this it's not amplified in any way because the y -intercept is 1 and We're given a point So to find this actual equation is very straightforward. We just plug in our input and output into the locations provided, right? We just substitute and then we solve for a. So my point 481 over 256 will look like this when I plug it into my function, right? I have my output equals a to the 4th. So when I start to solve for A, I basically take the quarter power of each side, right? I take this to the one -fourth power, this to the one -fourth power. But I don't want to leave that as my answer. 

10:39 
I want to see if I can simplify this at all. So what I can do then, we know that from our rules of exponents that a fraction to a power is the same as the numerator to this power and the denominator to this power as well. So we'll go ahead and distribute this 1 fourth to the numerator and denominator. In 81, I can rewrite as a fourth degree term. In 256, I can rewrite as a fourth degree term as well. So it's 3 to the fourth to the 1 fourth power and 4 to the fourth to the 1 fourth power. Rules of exponents says I multiply these, which is nice because 4 times 1 fourth cancels and I get a value of 3 fourths for my base of a. Therefore, my function is f of x equals 3 to the 4th to the x power. 

11:34 
So one of the main applications that we generally talk about when we talk about exponential functions is compound interest. So we've done simple interest before back in chapter one. So in this section, we're going to talk about compound interest, right? So compound interest is found by the formula A of T is P times one plus R over N raised to the power of N times T. We use T instead of X because we gain interest over time, right? 

12:08 
So again, interest is gained when you, um, when you invest money compound simple interest just means that you you get a steady amount no matter what compound interest means that that amount that you get is added to your value every so often okay every day every month every year what have you so for our pieces Aft right our function here represents the amount of money that we will make after investing P dollars for T years At a rate of our rates ours are percentage rate that we're getting interest. Where we are compounding this right. Either being charged or adding this money to our initial investment at a rate of n times per year. 

13:08 
So the more times we compound in a year. So as any it's very large the larger. the value that we earn becomes, right? So if I invest into something that compounds my interest monthly, I generally will earn more than something that compounds yearly, right? And so this is why your credit cards work the way that they do. Your credit cards generally will compound monthly. So every month, the interest that you're accruing on the credit that you're using gets charged monthly. Every month that's why you have monthly bills, right? Okay now We compound, you know Either once up to an infinite number of times, but the value that we're gonna earn is Only increases to a limit right so again if we're talking about investing money. 

14:07 
If I am investing in something that compounds very very often very large right times per year number of times per year I am going to see more money receive more money than if I were to invest in a similar account that. compounded less times per year but the value that i'm earning does not go to infinity in that time period right it only increases to a certain limit right so the limit of my value of investment as The number of times I compound per year increases does not reach infinity. It reaches a finite value Okay, so the limit as n goes to infinity, right? So if I plug in very very large values of n here very large values of n here No matter what the P and the R and the T are here This does not go into Infinity it reaches a stable value basically. Okay, so let's look at this an example. 

15:06 
So So let's say that we invest $2 ,500 into a money market account that has an average of 0 .5 return that is compounded once a year. And so this is actually the average rate right now. Okay. So when I made this problem, I looked at what the average, uh, interest rate is for a money market account and so this is you know the standard value at this moment in 2022 So how much money would we have after five years? OK, so I'm investing this much money after five years. I want to know how much money I'm going to have. And I know that the interest rate is half of a percent and they only give me this money once a year. Right. So yearly. So after five years, how's that going to happen? So the first thing that we like to do is figure out what our unknown values are, right? 

16:06 
What's our P? What's our R? What's our T? What's our N? So my investment amount is $2 ,500. Okay. My R, remember this is a percentage, so we have to turn it to a decimal value because we can't do math with percents. We have to use their decimal equivalent. So this is .005. Okay. My n is 1 because I compound yearly, once a year, right? And the amount of time is 5 years. So when I take all these and I plug them into my formula, it looks like this, okay? And obviously we want to simplify this a little bit. So 0 .005 divided by 1 is just 0 .005. 1 times 5 is just 5. So this simplifies pretty nicely into this pretty basic looking equation. So now I would plug this into my calculator and find my value. And since we're talking about money, we want to be accurate to two decimal places. 

17:06 
So I get this as my output, 2, 5, 6, 3, 0 .128133, and I cut it off after two decibels. Now, we're still going to round, okay? Generally in banks, they don't, right? They apply this whole value towards your account, but they only show you the 0 .12, but you do have... eight one thousandth of a cent also being applied to your account that you wouldn't see here right so here we're gonna round up this is basically another cent okay so after five years we're gonna have twenty five hundred sixty three dollars and thirteen cents so let's look at this in terms of compounding more times per year, right? So let's say we compounded monthly instead of yearly. Well, there's 12 months in a year. 

17:58 
So that means that they will pay us out, you know, that extra amount of money that we're earning in our interest rate, right, in our account every month. So that means we're going to do this 12 times a year. So our function is 2 ,500, 1 plus my interest rate over n, which is 12. And then here we have 12 times 5 because, again, this is the total number of times we compound over the time that we're interested in, right? So 12 times a year for 5 years, 12 times 5. Find what this is in a decimal value or simplify it as a fraction. It's even better. Plug all of this into our calculator. to figure out that it's 2563 .27445. So it's not a huge difference if we do this 12 times a year instead of once a year, right? It's about, what's that? 

18:56 
15 cents more over a five -year period. So we're not making a ton more. But obviously with large values, there would be a significant difference, okay? So after five years, we are making just a little bit more, right? Let's say we compound daily, right? So there's 365 days in a year. So our N in that case would be 365. Everything else stays the same. P is still 2 ,500. R is still 0 .005. And T is still five, but my N is 365. So calculate all of the stuff plug it into our calculator to get an accurate value and We are a little bit Larger than we were before this is 27 cents. 

19:45 
This is 28 cents more like 29 cents right so maybe two cents more than I had if I did it 12 times a year and It's what about? 16 cents more than if I do it once a year. So after five years we would have this amount. So again, as the number of times we compound our interest into our account, the amount that we receive over time increases as well. So if n is 1, we have 2 ,563 .13. n equals 12, add a little bit more. When n was 365, I add a little bit more than that as well. And that is how a compound interest works. 

